□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□Bicycle Helmet Safety Institute□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□ASTM F8.53 Helmet SubCommittee
□□□□Unofficial and for members' convenience only□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□Minutes from ASTM F8.53 meeting: Miami, November, 2002.□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□ASTM Sub-Committee F-08.53 Headgear & Helmets□□□□
DRAFT MINUTES OF MEETING□□□□
November 8, 2002 - Miami, FL□□□□□□
The subcommittee meeting was called to order by Randy Swart □at 8:42 AM.□ Dave Halstead (Chairman) was called away early and could not
preside over this meeting.  There were 22 members and 7 visitors in
attendance.  Attendance list was passed around.
□□□□□□□□Officers□□□□□□□
Chairman: Dave Halstead□□□□□
1st Vice Chairman: Randy Swart□□□□
2nd Vice Chairman: Dennis Piper□□□□
Secretary: Isabel Wright
□□□□□□□Members□□□□□□□
Jason Brand□□□□
Nelson Kraemer□□□□
George Nagobads□□□□
Fred Sulzbach□□□□
Roy Burek□□□□
Dean Fisher□□□□
Thom Parks□□□□
David Thom□□□□
Len	Clement□□□□
Mark Granger□□□□
David Rudd□□□□
Chris Withnall□□□□
Eric Darnell□□□□
Joseph Lunny□□□□
John Sabelli□□□□
Steven Keller□□□□
Peter McGinnis□□□□
David Spenciner
□□□□□□□Visitors□□□□□□□
Jean Francois Laperriere□□□□
Dennis Lieu□□□□
Michael Swain□□□□
Matthew Pfeffer□□□□
Trish Bare-Grounds□□□□□Heiko Schlarb□□□□
Vijaya Kuruganti□□□□□□□□□□□□ASTM Staff:□□□□ Jim Olshefsky□□□□□
Note:□ Minutes to committee/subcommittee meetings will no longer be
mailed out.  They will be available at the ASTM Website and the BHSI
Website.
□□□
Announcements: ASTM is making virtual meeting technology available to
members.  An Internet connection is required.  A sub group of the
subcommittees could meet via Internet to make presentations or make
progress on task group work in between regular meetings.  Call Jim
Olshefsky (Staff Manager) to get more info on how to set up a virtual
meeting.
□□□□
1) Introductions were made of those in attendance.
□□□
2) Changes in agenda - Pole Vaulting & Martial Arts were moved up in
the agenda.
□□□
3) F-1446-00 Base Standard -
□□□□
a) Headform specification:  - David Spenciner □-□ We currently reference
a draft international standard (ISO 6220) that has been discontinued
in our helmet tests.  Intention is to take the information from this
document and put it in ASTM format than we would have our own headform
standard.  The document was balloted and there were 3 comments and 1
negative.
□□□
Negative:  Dave Thom - Frankfort plane vs. Basic plane.  No evidence
that the Basic plane corresponds to Frankfort plane.  EN960 is
referenced in this document but Frankfort plane is not mentioned in
EN960.  If there is a reference that ties these two planes together,
then it should be listed in the headform draft.  If not, then the term
"Frankfort plane" should be taken out. □ It was determined that this
wording can be removed as an editorial change.
□□□□□
Motion: Made by Dean Fisher:  Term was found to be editorial and the
term Frankfort plane will be removed.
□□□□Vote:□□□□
Yes --- Passed unanimously□□□□
No	---□□□□□
Abstain	---□□□□□
Additional comments:□□□
1) Comment from Dave Thom - Product marking discussion - Product
marking vs. just "marking"□□□
2) Comment from Jason Brand & Dave Thom - 4 typos in document.  2 pages
of text and 5 pages of tables.  The numbers (typos) in the tables will
be changed to reflect what is currently in the ISO draft standard.

Dave Spenciner commented that in moving forward, there should be some
review of these numbers at a later date.  These would not be editorial
changes.□□□
3) Comment from Jacques Tholin deals with the possibility of the
headform rotating on impact.  Energy used in rotation is not captured
by linear accelerometer.  This was discussed yesterday at shirtsleeves
meeting. □ Will wait for Jacques Tholin to come to next meeting for
further explanation and discussion.□□□
4)	Comment from Guillaume Blanger - (Section 4) Suggests that all
headform sizes should be included from A-Q as per EN960 instead of
only the 5 sizes (A, E, J, M & O).  After extended discussion it was
concluded that this topic along with the shape geometry will be
discussed as part of the next revision, since this document has passed
main committee.□□□
5)	Comment from Guillaume Blanger - Delete the word "helmet" from the
headform standard.  (editorial change).□□□
6) Comment from Celia Peterson - Cross reference to ANSI headform C
which is a part of ASTM F355 (playground equipment) (similar to DOT
standard). - There is another reference that they can use, original
ANSI standard or DOT standard.□□□
Congratulations were given to Dave Spenciner for completing this
standard.  Dave will get with ASTM editorial staff regarding small
changes.  The document then moves on to publication.  Dave will then
start work on possible revisions to the published document based on
comments provided at this last ballot.
□□□
b) Comprehensive Clean-up - Dan Pomerening - Dan was absent from this
meeting due to family reasons - Dan continues to look at this
subcommittee's various standards to make them more uniform in format.
□□□
c) Labeling - Jason Brand - Jason had put together a spreadsheet of
all labeling from each of the standards of this subcommittee plus two
from Ice Hockey subcommittee.  Some revisions were made after the
Pittsburgh meeting and copies were sent to the labeling task group.

More assistance is needed.  The plan is to specifically look at F1446,
revise, look for commonalties  and then suggest labeling for  " use only
for ..."  and multiple standards.  After F1446, will go through
remaining standards and revise as needed.  Keep in mind label
requirements for CPSC and CSA.
□□□□
Labeling Task Group
□□□□
Task group: Jason Brand,John Sabelli,Guillaume Blanger, Mark Granger,
Thom Parks
□□□□□Note: □If□ anyone would like to be on the e-mail list of the labeling
task group, please contact Jason Brand (jason@teamwendy.com)
□□□
d) Dynamic Strap Test (F1446) - Roy Burek -  Ballot item - Purpose of
suggested change dealt with instructing technicians on how to adjust
the harness when testing to remove variability.  1 negative and 2
comments. □ Negative - Dave Spenciner - The proposed change was not
clear.  Needs clarification to add an extra step.  Wording changes -
should be appropriate "referenced" headform.  An additional wording
change regarding "impact headform".  Will confirm with ASTM to make
sure these changes are editorial.  The changes will be made and the
negative was withdrawn.□Comments -  Additional comments were discussed
from Dennis Piper, Jason Brand and Jeff Skein.
□□□
Additional activity (F1446) - Dave Spenciner has offered to help with
the P&B task force.  We have some data from CPSC's round robin several
years ago that may work without further testing for the Precision and
Bias statement
□□□
4) F697-00 Practice for care and use of Athletic Mouth Protectors□□□
No activity.□ Dr. Hank Cross was not at the meeting.  Nothing pending.
□□□□
5) F910-86 Baseball / softball face protector - Larry Maddux not here
- □No activity□□□□
6) Martial Arts Helmet - Dr. Dennis Lieu - The task group met
yesterday with approx. 12 people at the meeting. □□The draft□
specification was covered in detail.  Copies are available from Dr.
Lieu.  Progress has been good, and there has been good cooperation.  The
draft martial arts specification came from already existing ASTM test
methods and some of the work from Dr. Lieu's laboratory.  The draft
currently calls for 2 types of tests.□□□□□□□
a)□ Falling test, standard ASTM test, low & high energy levels□□□
b)□□ Impact test , swinging arm which simulates types of impact in
martial □□arts.□ low & high energy.
□□□□□□□□□
This is not a one time use head gear.  Needs to survive multiple
impacts over an extended period of time.  A Hybrid III head was
proposed.  The impact tester for the swing arm needs to be built. □ Low
temperature test was eliminated.  Test line - area of testing was
expanded where impacts are expected.  Eliminate max. mass
specification.  Headgear must protect the wearer and opponent
(striker).  Labeling will have to be reviewed.  Discussed life span
recommendation. It was noted that there is a European martial arts
standard.
□□□□□
7) Pole Vaulting Helmets - Peter McGinnis □-□ The task group met
yesterday. □ Following are the minutes of the task group meeting. □Note:□
Only an overview of these minutes was discussed at the full
subcommittee meeting.
□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□
F08.53 TASK GROUP ON POLE VAULT HEADGEAR□Meeting Minutes□□□□
November 7, 2002 - 8-10 am
□□□□
Fontainebleau Hilton - Miami Beach, FL
□□□
Present: Spencer Chang, Tim Curley, Edward Dare, Eric Darnell, Cynthia
Doyle, Bill Farrell, Dean Fisher (co-chair), Mark Granger, David
Halstead, Jan Johnson, G. Peter Macon, Mark Massmann, Peter McGinnis
(co-chair), Dennis Piper, Eddie Seese, Wilson Soohoo, Randy Swart,
David Thom
□□□□1.	Discussion:□ Is a pole vault headgear standard needed?□□□□□□□□□□ 4 state high school associations require helmet use by high school
pole vaulters but do not specify  type of helmet to use:  Minnesota,
North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wisconsin□□□□□□□□ New York State legislature has proposed a law requiring all
college and high school pole vaulters  to wear helmets
□□□□□□□□ implementation of rules requiring larger pole vault pits and
padding of hard surfaces eliminates  much of the head injury risks
- but many head injuries in pole vaulting have occurred in non-
compliant facilities (i.e., unpadded hard surfaces around the pit
or unpadded standard bases)
□□□□□□□□expectations of helmet users will exceed capabilities of helmets -
clear warning labels explaining  the limitations of a helmet and
the instructions for helmet use would need to be included as part
of a □standard
□□□□□□□□helmets should not be considered the only solution to the problem
of reducing head injuries in pole  vaulting, but one part of an
overall plan to reduce injuries in pole vaulting
□□□□□□□□some concern about hyperflexion injuries to vaulter's neck when
vaulter lands on pole vault pad  while wearing headgear
□□□□□□□□□Motion by Halstead, second by Seese:□□□□
To create a pole vault headgear standard to be considered by governing
bodies as part of an overall plan to reduce pole vault injuries.□□□□□
Motion passed:□ 19 in favor, 0 opposed
□□□□2.	Discussion:□ elements of pole vault headgear standard□□□□□□□□□□□□□single or multiple impact?
□□□□□□□□which impact anvils will be included in testing - flat,
cylindrical, curbstone, hazard?
□□□□□□□□extent of helmet coverage?
□□□□□□□□shape?
□□□□□□□□drop height?
□□□□□□□□
Dean Fisher has begun developing a pole vault headgear standard which
combines elements of F1446, □F1447, and F1492.
□□□□Motion by Halstead, second by Seese:□□□□□
The task group recommends that the F08.53 Subcommittee on Headgear and Helmets approves the following statement: □□While the committee is working to establish an appropriate headgear standard for use in pole vaulting the committee recommends that governing bodies, consumers, and others desiring to use helmets immediately use helmets that meet one of the following standards:□ ASTM 1492, Snell N-94, or NOCSAE
lacrosse helmet without face guard.
□□□□Discussion: □□□□□□□□□□□□availability of helmets meeting the Snell N-94 or ASTM 1492
standards?
□□□□□□□□why not include CPSC bicycle helmet standard? (inadequate
coverage)
□□□□□□□□what are the performance characteristics of the NOCSAE approved
lacrosse helmets?
□□□□□□□□
Motion amended to read as follows:□□□□□
The task group recommends that the F08.53 Subcommittee on Headgear and Helmets approves the following statement: □□While the committee is working to establish an appropriate headgear standard for use in pole vaulting the committee recommends that governing bodies, consumers, and others desiring to use helmets immediately use helmets that meet one of the following standards: □ASTM 1492 or NOCSAE lacrosse helmet without face guard.
□□□□Motion passed:□ 12 in favor, 1 opposed, 5 abstentions  (see note below
for the final version of the statement as approved by F08.53
Subcommittee on Headgear and Helmets)
□□□□TASKS:□ Dean Fisher has begun and will continue development of a pole
vault headgear standard which combines elements of F1446, F1447, and
F1492.
□□□
Meeting adjourned at 9:50 am.
□□□□
Respectfully submitted:  Peter M. McGinnis, Ph.D. (Co-chair)
□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□
On Friday, November 8, 2002, the F08.53 Subcommittee on Headgear and
Helmets met and passed the following by a vote of 8 in favor and 0
opposed, with 8 abstentions:□While the committee is working to establish an appropriate headgear standard for use in pole vaulting the committee recommends that governing bodies, consumers, and others desiring to use helmets immediately use helmets that meet one of the following standards:□ ASTM 1492 or NOCSAE lacrosse helmet without face
guard or visor.
□□□
Motion was made by Peter McGinnis and seconded by Dave Thom.
□□□□Vote□□□□
Yes	8□□□□
No	0□□□□
Abstain	8□□□□
8) F2040 Recreational Snow Sports - Sid Roslund - □ Short discussion
regarding editorial issues of plus/minus symbol on the ballot item.

This document is ready to go to main committee ballot.
□□□□
9) Roller hockey - □Guillaume Blanger □-□□ This is a new standard and  was
put out for ballot.  4 negatives were received along with a series of
comments.
□□□
a) John Sabelli - section 4.5 re: ear coverage.  The drawing will be
fixed to address this persuasive negative.  Discussion on section 4.4
(1st sentence)
□□□
b) Randy Swart - Impact is currently on 4 specific points on or above
test line in the document.  Discussion on controlled and uncontrolled.

There was a vote on the negative - should allow testing on any
location on or above the test line and not restricting it to specific
sites.  Negative was found to be persuasive.
□□□□Vote□□□□
Yes	11□□□□
No	0□□□□
Abstain	7
□□□□□c)	David Spenciner -□ Discussion on rationale on UV testing and
relevance of the test proposed.  There was a consensus to remove
artificial aging test from the draft.
□□□
d) Labeling - Not intended for Ice Hockey -  Leave labeling as is.
□□□
e) Garnet Alexander - Section 4.5 and 5.1 temperature too high (50C)
for helmet conditioning.  A task group was formed to look into this.
□□□
Heat aging helmets Task Group
□□□□□Task group	Jason Brand	Guillaume Blanger□□□□
Guillaume will continue with the development of this standard and
re-ballot.
□□□
10) Soccer Headgear - Dennis Piper □-□□ The letter from the US Soccer
Federation (lead team physician) regarding the draft soccer helmet
standard was read to the subcommittee.  Dennis Piper chaired the task
group meeting.  About 25 people attended.  The helmet would protect
against incidental impacts in soccer, primarily from goalposts, the
ground and other players, not specifically heading.  The draft went out
for ballot and received many negatives.  These were discussed in the
task group meeting.  One negative was regarding the retention system in
the draft required a hard shell.  There was a vote that there should
not be a hard shell-dependent retention system in the standard.
□□□□Vote□□□□
Yes	14□□□□
No	0□□□□
Abstain	6□□□□
11) F1447-99a □□Bicycle -□□ (now combined with F1751) - Les Earnest -
□□□
There was 1 comment (affirmative w/ comment) from Jacques Tholin -
Paragraph 13:  label Interior / permanent label  Labeling task group
will discuss the word "permanent".
□□□
12) F1751-00 - Recreational Roller Skating - Les Earnest - see above
(F1447)
□□□
13) F1898-01 Infant toddler Non-Motorized Wheeled Vehicle - No
activity. □□Nothing pending
□□□□14)	F1952-00□ Downhill Bicycle Racing - No activity. □Nothing pending□□□□
15) F2032-00 BMX Bicycle - No activity. □Nothing pending□□□□
16) F429-01 Football test methods - Republished last year. □No report
□□□□17)	F 717-95□ Football helmets  - Thad Ide □□No report
□□□□18)	F1163-00□ Equestrian- status - Roy Burek □□-□□□ This item went to
ballot.  There were 3 negatives.  There was a problem with the format of
the ballot and It was unclear from the ballot what exactly was being
changed. □ After discussion and clarification, all 3 negatives were
withdrawn.  The balloted change goes on to main committee ballot.
□□□
Task group Roy Burek, John Sabelli
□□□
Additional equestrian activity - □ Dave Halstead has sent a letter to
Senator Dodd who is head of a committee that is looking at a bill in
the US Senate that would require the CPSC to adopt an equestrian
helmet standard.  This is similar to the legislation that required the
CPSC to adopt a bicycle helmet standard.  The legislation would list
the adoption of the ASTM standard, and not one from the CPSC.  The
issue of updating the standard is also included in the letter.  There
has been no response since the letter was sent 9/6/02.
□□□
Branch task group - Roy is still looking for a letter that was in the
equestrian press, regarding that ASTM had not considered branches &
equestrian helmets.  There are concerns in the UK regarding penetration
injuries.
□□□□
19) Rodeo Helmets - New standard -  Status: - Task group will continue
activity.
□□□
Task group Fred Sulzbach, Len Clement, Roy Burek
□□□
20) F1492-00 Skateboarding - No report
□□□□Notes:□ No manufacturers are making helmets certified to F1492.
□□□
21) F-1849-00 Short Track speed ice skating - No report, nothing
pending
□□□
22) Whitewater sports helmet - □ Eric Darnell is the new task group
chairman (point person)  More data is needed regarding injuries.
□□□
Task group: Eric Darnell, Gill Turner, Dave Halstead
□□□
23) Mountaineering. - No active task group
□□□
24) Jaw Joint Protectors - New (Z6103Z) - Chris Withnall reported that
there is activity in  this area with Biokinetics and Wayne State
University working together. □There is a□ target date of DEC 2005 for a
completion date.
□□□□Task group	Chris Withnall□□□□
25) Other business
□□□□□□□F-08 Administrative deadlines:□□□□□□□□
1st round subcommittee ballots Due 1DEC02□□□□
Minutes and Main ballot items Due 23JAN03□□□□
2nd □round subcommittee ballots	Due	7MAR03□□□□
Agendas (Kansas City) Due 4APR03
□□□□□□□□□Review of subcommittee membership:□□□□□□□□
The subcommittee is in balance as regards to producers vs. all other
categories.
□□□
Producers: Voters 26 - Non-Voters 30□□□□
Users: Voters 8 - NonVoters 1□Consumer: Voters 0 - NonVoters 0□General
Interest: Voters 57 - Nonvoters 11□Unclassified Voters 1 - Non Voters
4□Totals: Voters 92 - Non-voters 46
□□□□□□□□Future F-08 meeting dates are as follows:□□□□□□May 7-10 2003 Kansas City, MO
Westin Crown Center, Kansas City, MO
□□□□
Nov. 19-22 2003 Tampa, FL Tampa Marriott Waterside, Tampa, FL
□□□□
May 18-21 2004 Salt Lake City, UT Little America Hotel & Towers
□□□□
Nov. 10-13 2004 Washington, D.C. Omni Shoreham, Washington D.C.
□□□□
May 17-20 2005 Reno, NV Hilton Reno Resort, Reno, NV
□□□□
Nov. 9-12 2005 Dallas, TX Hyatt Regency, Dallas, TX
□□□□
May 16-19 2006 Toronto, Canada Sheraton Centre Toronto
□□□□
Nov. 15-18 2006 Atlanta, GA Hyatt Regency, Atlanta
□□□□□□□Next Meeting□□□□ - May 7-10, 2003 - Kansas City, MO
□□□
The meeting was adjourned at 11:41 AM
□□□
Respectfully submitted,□Isabel Wright (Secretary)
□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□Last modified: July 21, 2002□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□